---
date: 2015-08-17 14:12
date: 2015-08-17 14:10
layout: post
title: "San Francisco, before the burn"
travel_dates: 2015-08-15 - 2015-08-23
tags: San-Francisco, USA, museums, Alcatraz
---

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19918806662/in/album-72157653894545484/" title="SF from the water"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/488/19918806662_a76a97b144_c.jpg" width="800" height="450" alt="SF from the water"></a>

I'd planned to arrive in San Francisco about ten days before Burning Man to give
myself plenty of time before hand to sort out all the preparations I would need
to make to survive a week in the desert. However I messed up and assumed I would
be able to figure out accommodation close to when I got there. By the time I did
try and book somewhere, I couldn't find anywhere to stay that was going to be
much less than USD$150 a night. This led to a lot of stress!

<!-- more -->

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/20378247679/in/dateposted-public/" title="Chad, Sarah and Me"><img src="https://farm6.staticflickr.com/5636/20378247679_89bef5afbd_c.jpg" width="800" height="534" alt="Chad, Sarah and Me"></a>

I contacted anyone and everyone I could think of that lived in the bay area,
trying to find someone who had a couch I could stay on for a while, and I was
saved by Sarah, Rachel's sister who I met in Guatemala. Her and her husband Chad
had just bought a condo, were in the process of moving in from their old place
and were happy to have me come stay in their new spare room.

Chad is even a bit of a Burning Man veteran, he's been going for a long time and
now volunteers as a ranger each year, so it was fantastic for me to have someone
who could answer my questions about what was and wasn't important stuff to take,
and tell me tales of past years events.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/20395641339/in/dateposted-public/" title="River saying hello to the camera"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/640/20395641339_7e0870d804_c.jpg" width="800" height="534" alt="River saying hello to the camera"></a>

Sarah and Chad's condo is a beautiful big place right near the mission district,
really spacious and light. They have an awesome dog named River, an American
bulldog, who seemed to take an instant shine to me, howling with excitement when
I arrived, wagging her tail like mad and trying to jump up on me. Such a lovely
natured dog!

Since Sarah and Chad were still in the process of moving, I got to be helpful by
going and helping to pack some boxes at the old place (just two blocks away),
and moving them down and up stairs.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19900195976/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Golden Gate bridge being covered by Karl the fog by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/434/19900195976_fd83fca6ec_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Golden Gate bridge being covered by Karl the fog"></a>

One of the nights not long after I arrived, there was a 15th anniversary
screening of [Office Space][office-space] happening at the Castro theatre that
Sarah and Chad were going to, so I grabbed a ticket and went along too. The
Castro Theatre is one of those historic old places that only plays arthouse
movies and cult classics, and for the 15th anniversary of Office Space, they
actually had Stephen Root (who played Milton with the Swingline stapler) there
to talk at the beginning and do a Q&A afterwards. It was just as funny as it was
when it came out, and it felt kind of surreal to be in a theatre full of people
who loved the movie so much and even a member of the cast!

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931147451/in/set-72157653894545484" title="SF Grafitti by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/479/19931147451_9a9fa9501f_c.jpg" width="800" height="730" alt="SF Grafitti"></a>

As I mentioned before, I'd planned to get to SF early to sort out my Burning Man
prep, but between booking my flights and arriving, I had actually been lucky
enough to be put in contact with a guy named Peter from the theme camp I was
going to stay with, who had an RV and was looking for someone to share it with.
This was a huge blessing, as it saved me blowing a bunch of money on a tent,
camp mat, sleeping bag, etc, that I would only have to give away afterward
anyway. Even more awesome was Peter's offer to handle acquisition of food and
water in exchange for money and a shopping list. My stresses about how I was
going to transport a weeks worth of food and water in when I was arriving by bus
were completely solved! I can't thank Pete enough.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19737829488/in/set-72157653894545484" title="These were the best Oreos ever by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3805/19737829488_2c0f057a53_c.jpg" width="800" height="600" alt="These were the best Oreos ever. I love you America!"></a>

With so much of the prep taken care of already, I got to spend a lot of my time
in San Francisco seeing touristy stuff instead. I also did do a lot of buying
stuff on Amazon , making good use of an Amazon Prime trial for free fast
shipping. After so long in Central America without easy access to a lot of
things, having things arrive at the house after just a few clicks online felt
like I was living in the future!

One day I went over to check out the SF cable car museum. I'd planned to
actually take the cable car up Nob hill from Powell and Market, but the lines to
get on were absurd so I just walked up instead. The museum was pretty neat, it's
actually in the same building where they pull the cables from and you can see
the giant motors and the big wheels they use to pull the cables through the
network.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19303206874/in/set-72157653894545484" title="The wheels that pull the cable for SFs cable cars by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/540/19303206874_ea9fb82bcb_c.jpg" width="800" height="600" alt="The wheels that pull the cable for SFs cable cars"></a>

There's also a subterranean bit where you can see how they manage to navigate
the cable around corners, and a lot of information about how the drivers have to
release the cable at certain corners or intersections in order to pass other
cables that cross the one that's pulling their car. It was all really
interesting to see and learn about.

There was a big section of the museum about the 1906 earthquakes that flattened
most of the city, destroying a lot of the old cable car lines, but also starting
fires while simultaneously knocking out the water pressure, leaving the fire
department unable to fight the fires and huge areas of the city just burning to
the ground. It's incredible to think that San Francisco has been completely
devastated by earthquakes twice in the same century.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19925926025/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Berkley campus by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/385/19925926025_65465c91ba_c.jpg" width="800" height="500" alt="Berkley campus"></a>

Another day I went over to the East Bay and had a walk around Berkeley, checking
out the very imposing building of the university there and some of the trendy
streets nearby.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19304964153/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Berkley pier by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/463/19304964153_51ec05bee1_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Berkley pier from the far end"></a>

Then I headed over to the Berkeley pier, and walked out along it to get another
view of the bay. The pier extends out about a kilometre into the bay, but from
the end of the pier you can see remnants of the old pier which was apparently
nearly 6km long!

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19900066716/in/set-72157653894545484" title="California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/349/19900066716_1627354f86_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="California Academy of Science"></a>

Another day I got a bus over to the California Academy of Science museum. It's
quite a cool building with a grassy, hilly rooftop, with lots of hardy plants up
there, that insulate the building keeping the temperatures more stable. There's
also a bunch of solar panels around the edge providing some of the buildings
power needs.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19738160348/in/set-72157653894545484" title="California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/320/19738160348_16df7f2136_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="California Academy of Science"></a>

Inside the building is split up into various sections about different areas and
topics. The basement houses a fairly large aquarium, with many of the tanks also
being viewable from above. From the top you can see the brightly coloured fish
swimming around, and in a shallow pool there was a number of pretty rays
gliding.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931180611/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Colourful fish at California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/382/19931180611_8f38edb6ae_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Colourful fish at California Academy of Science"></a>

The aquarium was split up between marine and freshwater fish, and then again
into regions of the globe. The prettiest tanks were the two giant marine tanks
for the Phillipines and the California coast. Interesting fact, what they call a
leopard shark in the USA is completely different from a leopard shark back in
Australia.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19899902666/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Octopus in a jar at California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/303/19899902666_4a430d258c_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Octopus in a jar at California Academy of Science"></a>

In the fresh water and swamp section they had some of the biggest freshwater
fish I've ever seen, and probably the biggest in the aquarium. I don't recall
the type, but they were enormous. Strange, I never think of fresh water fish as
having any real mass to them.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931190841/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Leafy sea dragons at California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/270/19931190841_e979c4c038_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Leafy sea dragons at California Academy of Science"></a>

They had some leafy and weedy sea dragons, along with pot belly seahorses. I
miss those guys from the piers around Port Philip Bay!

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19305260263/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Rainforest dome at California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/549/19305260263_6f1110a0ec_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Rainforest dome at California Academy of Science"></a>

There is a big sealed up rainforest zone, which has the temperature and humidity
of a real rainforest. I sped through a good chunk at the start because it was
all the animals I'd gotten used to seeing regularly in Central America. In the
later parts there were some neat creatures from South America, and lots of tiny
very poisonous pretty frogs.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19926261105/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Whale skeleton at California Academy of Science by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/519/19926261105_e4b3898a59_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Whale skeleton at California Academy of Science"></a>

There is also a big section about earthquakes, with info about SF's big quakes,
and a simulator that roughly shows what it would have been like to be in both of
them. It was kind of cool, but the fear that you get in a real earthquake (like
the one I felt in Xela, in buildings of unknown structural soundness) just
wasn't there.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19305318023/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Golden Gate poking over the hills by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/281/19305318023_834fc0ce7f_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Golden Gate poking over the hills"></a>

After I finished up at the museum, I found out you could go up the tower across
the way at the de Young museum and get a good view of the city, so I did.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19739660489/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/451/19739660489_db09534766_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz"></a>

I wanted to go and see Alcatraz, but I'd heard you usually have to book at least
a few days in advance, and for the night tours, sometimes months in advance. I
looked into it a few days before I wanted to go and most of the times were
pretty crappy and the night tour was full, but then I looked again the next day
and now there was one ticket available for the night tour, so I booked that.
Glad I procrastinated booking that one or I would have missed out!

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931463481/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/308/19931463481_8a16e5a6bb_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz"></a>

The beautiful weather that day held out into the afternoon, so when I got the
boat went over to Alcatraz I got a great view of the Golden Gate bridge,
followed by a nice loop around the rock itself.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19900199966/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Welcome to Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3751/19900199966_63a3b1be58_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Welcome to Alcatraz"></a>

Since it was the night tour, we were given some extra commentary by a live
speaker on the boat over. Once we landed we had another short tour with some
more stories and history about the place, leading us up to prison where we were
given audio guide that led us around the prison, telling us about the guards in
the inmates who had lived there.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19739786029/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Entry showers at Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/558/19739786029_2317a0173f_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Entry showers at Alcatraz"></a>

It started in the showers, and then led us up and around through the various
cell blocks, the library, into the administration section, out to the wardens
house (where paused it and ducked over to get another look at the bridge with
the sun set), then back through the cell blocks, past "time square" (the prison
clock) and into the mess hall.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19918985892/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/481/19918985892_b84a88d60e_c.jpg" width="601" height="800" alt="Alcatraz"></a>

I saw the dummy heads used in the escape of three prisoners, completely with
human hair. Later a guest guide gave a story about that escape, how the guys
involved had worked out there were vents in the maintenance shaft between the
cells, because of one part of the prison that had been remodeled, leaving a vent
showing in open roof.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19303872484/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz cells by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/449/19303872484_fba7b33306_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz cells"></a>

He told us how they were working painting the ceilings, and claimed that they
wanted to paint the whole way through (inside maintenance shafts too). They
kicked a lot of dust off while there were in there, which then went into
prisoner cells making a lot of people unhappy, and so they were allowed to put
up painters drop sheets, providing them with the cover they needed to work on
their escape.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19305597653/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz control room by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/456/19305597653_6cdeba8f60_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz control room"></a>

We heard how they'd steal spoons, since the knives were carefully counted and
one missing would have resulted in everyone having to go through a metal
detector, but spoons weren't considered a dangerous weapon. We were told how
they carved out the vents in their rooms, hiding their work with art they had
painted; and how after they escaped, they were never seen again, their bodies
never found. To this day it's a mystery as to their fate.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19738609208/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Administration building by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/461/19738609208_8ca1658f05_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Administration building"></a>

Another guide told us a story about the final escape at the prison. A guy who
had always acted like a model prisoner got promoted to the store room. He then
stacked boxes in front of a window until it was well obscured, then spent a year
cutting through the bars inside the window.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19900451196/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/267/19900451196_fd37b2bc42_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz"></a>

The outer bars were softer steal, so eventually he made a break for it, cutting
through them in just one night. He then blew up rubber gloves and stuffed them
in his shirt to make himself a floatation device and headed out into the bay,
but he got caught in the tide and missed all the piers he had aimed to end up
at. He ended up landing at Presidio, which was at the time a military base,
where he was recaptured immediately.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19919141252/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz infirmary by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/299/19919141252_2dd92f9ca7_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Alcatraz infirmary"></a>

Other perks of the night tour were that there were lots more talks and
presentations than normal, and several parts of the prison were open that are
not normally open such as the rec yard and the hospital. Unfortunately, the
talks were all great, and back to back, so I didn't actually get much time to
explore the hospital and didn't get to the rec yard at all. I would have loved
another 2-3 hours to explore, and a tripod to have a go at some real HDR photos.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931823731/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Alcatraz cells by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/430/19931823731_7fa9052cd1_c.jpg" width="800" height="450" alt="Alcatraz cell corridor at night"></a>

One of the coolest things on the night tour was the slamming of the cell doors,
a presentation where they opened and closed the doors of a row of cells, telling
us how that booming sound was specifically designed to communicate to the
prisoners who was in control. There is a big metal cover over the doors
machinery and the doors actually work just fine without it, but nearly silently
instead of the loud booming sounds.

<div class="videowrapper"><iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/twecNQlzBW4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

They told us that the sound of those doors has been sampled and used in lots of
movies, for example Jurassic Park and The Empire Strikes Back. It's a pretty
iconic sound.

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/lucasthenomad/19931836531/in/set-72157653894545484" title="Last view of Alcatraz by Lucas the nomad, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm1.staticflickr.com/357/19931836531_affa630f39_c.jpg" width="800" height="601" alt="Last view of Alcatraz"></a>

[office-space]: http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0151804/
